>> Welcome to
the Haskell weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell, a purely
functional programming language.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak.
I'm an engineer at ITProTV.
With me today is Cameron Gera,
one of the engineers on my team.
Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Of course
Taylor, glad to be here.
Uh, we've got an exciting topic
to talk about today and something
that's impacted us here at ITProTV.
Uh, and so, you know, I'm really
excited cause we have a special
guest with us today our Haskell
wizard himself, Cody Goodman is here.
Um, and Cody's going to help us kind
of talk about, um, async control flow,
because we discovered some issues with
some of our code base because of an
issue with an underlying, you know,
the async control flow in Haskell.
So, um, welcome Cody.
>> Thanks, Cam.
Yeah.
Uh, like you're saying, um, we
had an issue with Postgres simple.
I guess I'm jumping right
into it as the YouTubers say.
>> That's okay.
>> Let's get right into it.
>> Um, so we, we got to work.
He saw a nice little Sentry
error in our Teams channel.
It said libpq query in progress.
And we're like, what?
What was going on there?
Um, So we, we go and we dig a little
deeper and eventually we find out that,
um, a long running batch process was
sometimes dying and it was leaking a
connection back into the pool, which.
Then if another connection tried to
use that pool, say a web process or
something, it would get a libpq failed,
another command is in process progress,
error, uh, which is kind of shocking.
>> Yeah.
We would only get this sometimes, right?
Cause like the bad connection would
get put back in the pool, but it would
be in the process of cleaning up.
So if enough time passed, the
connection would be good again.
So you wouldn't see this error.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah.
And, uh, you know, and we had a lot
of various libraries to look at,
you know, we had libpq, postgres
simple, resource pool, resource T,
persistent, persistent Postgres SQL.
So there was a lot at play here.
And Cody, I know you've spent a lot of
time on this, so I'm really excited that,
you know, You can be here and talk to us.
Cause I know you worked with Matt
Parsons, um, after fault, after
filing an issue in, um, persistent,
that then led to our discovery of
what was really going on underneath.
So, um, you know, talk through,
you know, the minimal case to
reproduce the bug, if you don't mind.
>> Yeah.
Uh, so the first thing is, uh, you
know, how do we get that high level
description of, we have some process
that's inserting some things and.
It's causing the connection
pool to become bad.
How do we get that into code?
And then, you know, you have
something, try to pull that back
out of the pool and reuse it.
Uh, one of the first things which, uh,
actually overlooked at first is just
having a pool with only one resource.
Um, because otherwise it's sort of like
gambling, uh, not a good use of your time.
>> You don't
want to play slots at work?
Just, pull it.
Oh, triple sevens, I win!.
>> It might've
been closer to like Russian
roulette with the connection pool
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
All money on red.
>> Um, but yeah, we had, like
Cody mentioned, this was like a background
process that was doing this and.
As is so common when you want to open
a bug against one of the open source
libraries that you're using, it's not very
helpful for the maintainer to say, you
know, this happens in our closed source
application and we think it's your fault.
So please fix your library.
We wanted to have something public
we could point to and say, look, this
is the problem we're running into.
So we were trying to take, you know,
our tens of thousands of lines of
code that are under consideration
for our app and point it to one of
those libraries that Cam mentioned
earlier, one of the seven different
libraries that could be at fault here.
>> Yeah.
So Cody, you were talking though about,
yeah, you probably, you started with
more than one, uh, you know, a pool
with more than one resource and then
you kind of narrowed it down, right.
To test with that one,
like a one resource pool.
>> Right.
Cause you know, that, that single
mistake there, not just taking a
second to say, okay, let's just
make sure we get this right.
That cost me some time because
sometimes it wouldn't fail.
And I was like, wow, why
is this not reproducible?
I can't just put this example that
only sometimes fails up there.
I guess I could.
Matt's a nice guy.
He probably would have ran it once.
Okay.
>> Yeah.
But you want it to be easy for
the maintainer to reproduce this
problem so that, you know, maybe
you'll nerd snipe them and they'll
be like, huh, that's weird.
That shouldn't happen.
And ideally that'll happen the first time.
The first time they try it.
>> Yeah, which seems to
be eventually what happened, right.
And you know, you partnering and
working with Matt a lot on this,
you know, helped and, you know,
obviously Matt's got a post about it.
You know, you have a lot
of notes and stuff from it.
So, you know, I think there was a
great experience for, you know, anybody
who's working with a library that, you
know, starting to create some issue.
Like it's a good example of say, hey,
like it's okay to create an issue.
And if you can make that reproducible
bug, you can work with the maintainer to
create a solution and help everybody that
uses the library, not just your own team.
>> Right.
And it's funny, you bring up nerd
sniping, Taylor, because really I'm,
I'm hoping that this nerd snipes some
people and we can actually answer this
question and improve Haskell as a whole.
Uh, so I'll, I'll say.
I'll say something provocative here.
I don't think many people
actually know the root cause here.
There's still a lot of
unanswered questions.
And I don't think a lot of people know
about asynchronous exceptions in Haskell.
hope to be proven wrong.
And we can figure this out
and add some documentation and
improve everything as a whole.
>> Yeah.
And I think you, you made a good point
is like, what is like asynchronous
exceptions and what are, you know, what's
the difference between synchronous control
flow and asynchronous control flow?
Um, could you give us kind of high
level overview of that Cody or Taylor?
>> Cody, I think
you're the one to answer that.
And I'll put you on the spot
>> Uh, yeah, kind of
been drowning them for two weeks.
So hopefully I understand, uh, what
they are well enough to describe it.
Um, so synchronous exceptions are
basically just on the same thread.
Uh, there's something like,
uh, if you use the unsafe head
function, um, this list was empty.
Uh, an asynchronous exception is easier to
think about in terms of like your computer
telling you, telling your process that
it ran out of memory and then canceling
your thread, where your computer here
is more specifically the GHC runtime.
>> Okay.
So I normally conceptualize an
async exception as coming from a
different thread, but it sounds like
if you think of the GHC runtime as
a separate thread, then that kind of
fits into that understanding as well.
>> Right.
And analogies are lossy, but hopefully
that's a good one to sort of start with
and, uh, be aware there's more subtleties.
>> Um, and is
there any difference here?
You mentioned using unsafe head,
which throws either undefined or
error or something like that, is there
really any difference between that
and control dot exception dot throw.
Or for these purposes, are
those basically the same.
>> Yeah, I'm a, I'm a
little spotty on that you might have
to help me out, but, uh, I think it's
precise versus imprecise exceptions.
>> Something like that.
And maybe the, the thing we
should be comparing against is
throw IO or like the monad throw
constraint, that type of thing.
Um, but yeah, I think for our purposes,
as far as this bug is concerned,
it didn't really matter if it was
a precise or imprecise exception.
It mattered if it was
synchronous or asynchronous.
>> Right, right.
>> Okay, so Cam, are you
satisfied with that, uh, description
of asynchronous control flow?
>> Yeah, I appreciate is
the, the least Haskell-ish wizard
here to get that understanding.
And I appreciate your analogy
of, and wording of how that
relates GHC runtime versus not.
So thank you Cody for that
explanation, Taylor as well.
Um, you
>> And maybe one other
thing we should mention actually,
before we move on from async control
flow is how you manage them, right?
So with normal synchronous exceptions,
you can add a catch or a handle around it.
And if you evaluate everything
at the right time, then you
can deal with that exception.
And with async exceptions, normally
you don't catch them that way.
Is that right?
Cody?
>> Right.
Uh, you normally, don't, that's,
that's actually a really big piece
of, this is the whole problem of
bracket and resource finalization.
Uh, you really struck a chord
here, if you can't tell.
Um, uh, basically there was a big
thread on this a while back, uh.
Bracket does not use,
uh, what was it called?
Uninterruptible blocking, uh.
>> Uninterruptible.
>> Masking.
There we go.
Yeah.
Which wasn't named blocking
because of reasons.
I don't remember the reason.
Uh, but yes, masking interruptable
masking versus uninterrupted masking.
Uh, that basically means can
the runtime system block.
Uh, what you're doing inside
of this code or can it not in
>> Okay.
And let's, let's unwind that a little bit.
So starting with the basics.
Bracket is a function where you tell.
You, you set up how to acquire a resource
and how to release a resource, and
then you use the resource within that.
So the most common example
I think is with file.
Like open a file is acquire,
close a file is release.
And then once you have that file
handle, you can write to it, read
from it and do whatever you want.
And masking, uh, like you mentioned,
it has to do with the runtime.
Can it interrupt what's
going on there or not?
Um, maybe interrupt is the wrong word to
use, but, uh, I typically conceptualize
masking as, uh, can an exception be thrown
into like, while this code is running, can
it receive an exception or is it, should
it avoid, should the runtime avoid sending
exceptions while this code is running?
Should it wait until it finishes.
>> Yeah, I think that's a,
that's a good way of looking at it.
Um, and for here specifically, what
we're concerned with is, uh, the
release portion of that bracket.
That is when that, that file
handle that you took, you
acquired from the file system.
When you're releasing it
back to the file system.
So all the other things
can make use of it.
Uh, can the GHC runtime
cancel that process?
Are you just going to have, uh, these file
handles out there that can't be reused?
>> Right.
And the problem could be that you
start releasing the file handle,
and then GHC interrupts that release
process with an async exception, for
instance, saying you're out of memory.
Something like that.
And then because of that, you don't finish
releasing that handle, but whatever code
around that call to bracket thinks that
the release has been run successfully.
So you have this kind of like a,
I dunno, Schrodinger's file handle
of, it's not open, it's not closed.
It's in this weird state that
it wasn't meant to be in.
Okay.
So hopefully that kind of
explains what we're dealing with
here with bracket and masking.
Right, Cam?
You feeling good with that explanation?
>> Uh, I'm feeling okay.
Yeah.
Our communication channel here broke up
in the middle of your last statement.
So I lost a little bit of what you
said, but overall, I think it's helpful.
Um, and you know, obviously
I think, you know.
Async exceptions aren't talked
about enough kind of like Cody
mentioned earlier, which, you
know, makes it seem like you're,
you're all alone in the situation.
It's like, wait a second.
There are other people who face it.
They just don't talk about it
either because they don't, they're
like the community just doesn't
think about and talk about async
exceptions in a regular format.
Like they just, it's a kind
of the, um, Yeah, kind of the
black sheep of Haskell, maybe.
Like thing that everybody knows is
wrong, but they just there's, hasn't
been the bandwidth time to take care
of it and find the perfect solution.
But I think now with the community
growing, creating a foundation, you know,
with that, we'll start to provide more
resources and maybe more, uh, platforms
for discussion and debate about what
async control flow should look like and
how we should handle async exceptions,
we'll move the language forward.
And so I'm really looking
forward to seeing how that comes.
You know, and maybe make it more
approachable to other people.
Because if you, you know, aren't super
invested and then you all of a sudden
come across this kind of issue and
you're like, Oh, well now I'm back away.
I'm not going to go any closer
to that because it's not worth
it for me because I'm not sure
what the heck is going on here.
Or.
Nobody seems to be talking about it.
So there's not really
support for this and I'm out.
>> Yeah, it
could be demoralizing.
Like you mentioned, if you're new
or newer to the language and you
run into this problem and nobody
seems to be talking about it.
So you're like, well, this
is just some insane edge case
that I happened to run into.
Well, maybe, maybe not, maybe it's
pretty common, but nobody talks
about it or everyone just hopes
that it doesn't happen to them.
And we got unlucky and it happened to us.
>> Right.
You know, you talk about Haskell
adoption, uh, is somebody at a big
company starts trying to use Haskell.
They convinced their team to use Haskell,
and then they get a Postgres error like
this, you know, an issue with what's
supposed to be a core library, uh, a
binding to Postgres that everyone relies
on, you know, a data dot pool, something
everyone thinks of is bulletproof.
Um, that's pretty scary.
You know, that's gonna make
you really rethink things.
That's not gonna make that person who,
who put their neck out to, uh, get their
team to adopt Haskell look very good.
>> Right.
Doubly so since Haskell has a reputation
of being focused on correctness,
And if you can immediately run into
a showstopping bug with, like you
mentioned, one of the most popular
libraries, then that's not a good look.
Um, it is worth mentioning that there are
library level solutions to this problem.
I think the unliftio library, um, does
resource finalization differently with
the bracket function that it exposes.
So if the persistent library or the
whole, you know, menagerie of packages we
rely on here, happened to use unliftio.
We wouldn't have run into this problem.
Um, or if unliftio was just part of
the base library, same situation.
>> Yeah, that, that
was my understanding as well.
I have a little bit of doubt though.
And the reason for that as I, I
replaced pretty much everything.
The Postgres part of persistent
with unliftio, including, uh,
forking data pool and, uh, or not.
Yeah, yeah.
Using someone else's PR that replaced
all of it with unliftio and it
still didn't solve the problem.
I had a lot of things running.
I could have got something
wrong in there, but.
It at least deserves to shake
that confidence a little, I think.
>> Uh, and the reason
I mentioned unliftio is that.
I'm reasonably sure its bracket
release uses an uninterruptible mask,
which means that the runtime wouldn't
be able to interrupt this release.
Um, but some people don't like that as
a default choice because then if you're
release sits there and like has an
HTTP timeout and takes 30 seconds to do
something, your program is completely
unresponsive for 30 seconds because like
hitting control C is an async exception
thrown from the runtime to your program.
So you wouldn't be able to respond
to that until that release wraps up.
>> Uh, I think the answer
there, um, it seems kind of simple.
Maybe someone else's recommended someone
else probably as is to make bracket
use on an uninterruptible mask by
default, and to take a required timeout.
>> That would make me happy.
>> Same.
>> Um, okay.
So, so we've been talking about masking
and bracketing and interrupting and all
this stuff, but let's, um, let's come up
a little bit and let's talk about how we
ran into this problem in the first place,
because like we mentioned not many people
talk about this and I think it's because
most of the time, in usual circumstances,
people aren't going to run into this and
we were doing something a little unusual.
Cody, could you explain
what we were doing?
>> Yeah.
If I recall we had an outer
left join and we didn't have a
distinct in combination with that.
So we were doing like, uh,
maybe it was Cartesian, uh,
of a thousand or 10,000 rows.
And it turned into like 50,000 or a
hundred thousand queries, one of the two.
>> Uh, results, not
queries, but yeah, yeah, yeah.
We had a join and then an aggregation
and we were duplicating the, uh,
that field over and over again.
And then we were iterating
over that aggregation.
So, we, we tried to batch something
up into like 10,000 rows, but each of
those rows contained several thousand
aggregated together fields within it.
Uh, so the data set, we were
looping over was really large.
So that, that was a big select, right?
And then we're also doing
an insert at the same time?
>> Right.
Yeah.
We were, uh, we had moved to streaming
with persistent yet, and we were
doing a solution where we did those
selects and then inserts right after.
So it added up to a lot.
>> Yeah.
So we kind of like accidentally got into
this situation and, you know, there was a
bug in our query and we have since fixed
it, but that doesn't mean we wouldn't
have run into this problem otherwise, just
that it would have been much less likely.
>> Right.
We would have had to have more processes
going that were requiring that thing.
I think here, you know,
this could happen to anyone.
Like that's really what we're trying
to say here is that, you know, you're
not alone if this happens to you, or if
you've struggled with this or anything
like that, like we we're all in this
together as a community and we're trying
to like, you know, really you know get,
get everything figured out, you know,
create the best version of Haskell we
can create and all have happy, fantastic,
uh, job satisfaction because we're
>> It sounds like we
may need a support hotline for.
Are you or someone, you know, affected
by async exception handling and Haskell?
Call this number now.
>> The async helpline.
>> Yeah,
>> We get, uh, Michael
Snowman to say some words of support?
>> I think it would just be,
it would be his personal phone number.
>> There it is.
Sorry.
Yeah, uh, Snoyman, but there you go.
You're on the hook now.
>> But yeah, so, so we ran
into this problem in a way we were kind
of fortunate to have this bug because
Cam like you mentioned, maybe we, we
would have run into this only as our
dataset got larger and then it would
have been like, well, this thing was
working fine for months and months and
then it just exploded, what happened?
So that was kind of lucky.
Um, And it was also in a way, a
little encouraging to see that
other libraries that we use are
also susceptible to this problem.
And on the flip side of that
coin, it's a little discouraging
because like, well, you know, this
seems like it's kind of pervasive.
Um, but yeah, the queue library that
we use has, it keeps track of how many
times it tries a job so that it doesn't
try something over and over again.
And.
That bit of logic wasn't working because
the like, uh, I, I assume is implemented
with bracket behind the scenes.
I don't remember.
Do you, do you know Cody?
>> I'm fairly sure it was
bracket, but I wouldn't bet money on it.
>> But yeah, so it
would, you know, check the count
and then if the count was too high,
it would put it into this failed
state rather than waiting to retry.
And we, we have a limit of 10 retries
on our jobs and these jobs that were
failing in this particular way with
this async exception, we're getting
retried hundreds of times instead.
And so that was like, huh, that's weird.
So we haven't chased that bug down
yet, but I bet it's going to be
the same or a similar root cause.
>> Yeah.
And when, when I saw that I was,
I thought, you know, am I going
crazy to something else change?
You know, what other millions of
things could I have done wrong?
>> Yeah.
Um, but yeah, Cody, I think you had
a good kind of thought experiment
here for, um, we, we were lucky in
a way to run into this bug, but is
there a way this could have been
prevented in the first place, right?
>> Right.
And I was thinking about that.
The only real way I think this
could have been prevented is if,
uh, when writing postgresql-simple,
you, you write functional tests
that presume whatever pattern.
It, it should be used in a, uh, I
guess, a professional space, which
would be with, uh, the pool library.
So that's kind of a big overhead
to ask of somebody who's already
creating your PostgreSQL bindings.
Uh, so it's kind of a hard problem,
but that that's what would have
been necessary to prevent this.
>> Right.
And we should say that, while that
test did not exist, it does now exist.
So as part of Matt chasing down the
root cause here, and fixing it in
persistent, he wrote a test case.
So we're pretty confident there
won't be a regression there.
Um, but you know, it would have
been nice to have it at the outset.
>> right.
Uh, and there's a related PR in
postgresql-simple that it hasn't been
merged yet or reviewed, I don't think.
Uh, but hopefully there can also
be a test to put in there since
pretty much all the other database
libraries, you know, opaleye, uh,
selda, uh, and I think maybe beam,
they depend on postgresql-simple too.
>> Right.
Yeah, it was interesting because
we reported or Cody, you reported
this bug and then there was
this kind of synchronicity
going on where two other people.
Reported the bug almost at the
same time in different libraries.
It's like what's happening here?
Weird to see.
>> Yeah.
And, uh, I tried to weave a, a
tangled web that you can follow and
see all the related things there.
Um, also include a link to some
notes where I'm trying to figure
out the real reason, the real
root cause of everything here.
>> Yeah.
And we'll add those links
into the show notes.
And like you mentioned a while
ago, Cody, um, If you're listening
to this podcast and you're like,
man, those guys are dummies.
The solution is so easy.
It's this thing.
Uh, please tell us, we would love
for somebody to just waltz in and
tell us what the, what the answer is.
That'd be great.
>> Yeah.
And I think it be insightful
for everyone, you know.
>> Yes, exactly.
Uh, we'll, we'll release a follow-up
episode if that happens with, uh.
>> With you as a guest.
>> We were dummies.
Here's what it is.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
You'd be a first-class guest here.
We'll pay for your flight and everything.
Come in, studio.
Fancy stuff, you know,
All paid expense trip.
I'm
>> writing some checks.
I don't know if we'll
be able to them or not.
>> I'm just joking, but
we would love to know if there is a
better solution or the right solution.
Um,
>> Um, well, one, one solution
is using a different library, right?
So Cody, you mentioned that most of
the ecosystem ultimately relies on
postgresql-simple kind of underpins
everything, but there is an alternative.
>> Right.
Um, there is a library that.
No one seems to know how to pronounce
in my circle called hasql or hasql.
I'm really not sure.
>> H A SQL,
if you want be verbose.
>> There, there we H A SQL, um.
>> I thought I was
just laughing SQL, like ha SQL.
>> That's cute.
I'll take that.
>> Yeah.
Maybe that's what it's supposed to be.
>> Um, so I,
I was led back to hasql.
I'll go with that.
Um, because when I was searching for
this issue, they had libpq command
in progress in their test suite.
So they had a regression test for it.
And I was like that immediately made
me think, hey, they've been here
before, what would it take to, to
replace postgresql-simple with hasql.
And, um, yeah, that was, that was
a thought, uh, part of me wishes I
would have just tried to replace the
PostgreSQL persistent stuff with hasql.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, that
could have been cool.
>> Yeah, that could be an
interesting thing to chase down, make
a persistent hasql binding library.
And, you know, the whole point of
persistent is that hopefully we'd would
be able to switch that out behind the
scenes without having to change our code.
Um, but we did not do that.
Not yet.
>> Um, what's what's even
funnier is I had that thought and
then Matt Parsons, while I was talking
to him, he actually said, you know,
unprompted, maybe it would have been
faster to rewrite this with hasql.
>> That's funny.
>> So yeah, if you're
listening to this podcast and
that sounds like a fun project
to you, please take it on.
>> Yeah, we would
adopt, be early adopters.
>> I was just going to say
that hasql is a, um, it's by Nikita
Volkov, and it's very focused on
correctness and it uses, I think the
binary protocol to talk to Postgres
and it tries to represent as much
as possible on the value level.
So instead of like throwing an exception,
if something goes wrong, it'll pull
back an either and then you have to
deal with that, however you want.
So that's one of the reasons I think that
it does have this cases, cause Nikita
was really going through this with a fine
tooth comb, try and find stuff like this.
>> I'm going to have to
actually look how he handles things
like, uh, asynchronous exception, you
know, like stack out of memory error or
whatever, uh, because one of the common
criticisms of handling exceptions like
that at the value level is, well what are
you just going to case on some exception?
>> Yeah, why not?
>> Well, I mean, we kind of
have some spots in our code base, but.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh, well, awesome.
You guys have anything else you want
to chat about in regards to async
control flow and async exceptions?
>> That's it for me.
>> I think that's everything.
I'll be writing books
on books in my notes.
>> Perfect.
Hey, we look forward to seeing that stuff.
Uh, thanks Cody for being on the
show and thank you all for listening
to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
I've been your host, Cameron Gera.
And with me today was Cody
Goodman and Taylor Fausak.
Uh, find out more about Haskell
Weekly, check out our website,
Haskell Weekly dot news.
And if you enjoyed the show,
please, please, please rate us
and review us on Apple podcasts
just helps more people find us.
It'd be awesome.
And if you have any feedback,
always feel free to tweet us
at Haskell Weekly on Twitter.
>> We are brought
to you by our employer, ITProTV,
which is an ACI Learning company.
They would like to offer you 30% off
the lifetime of your subscription.
You can redeem that by checking out, going
through the normal flow and adding the
promo code Haskell Weekly 30 at checkout.
Um, so please go to it pro dot tv
and sign up for a subscription.
But that'll about do it for us today.
Thanks for joining us and
we'll see you next week.
Bye.
>> Peace.